Debates have raged within politics about the possible and the necessary as climate change policy in New Zealand has been more accustomed to lurching than developing, writes Audrey Young
If you get the feeling that debate about climate change policy has been going on for years and years, that’s because it has.
For millennials, it has been a whole lifetime.
The first report on climate change by a New Zealand Government was commissioned in 1988, when David Lange was Labour Prime Minister, the first Die Hard movie was in cinemas and All Black Ryan Crotty was born.
It was a 28-page report by the Royal Society of New Zealand titled Climate Change in New Zealand. The most recent big-deal event was the Paris Agreement on climate change.
Much has happened in between those two significant events.
Debates have raged within politics about the possible and the necessary. Targets have been set and unset. Sometimes the big parties have agreed and sometimes they have been hampered by smaller parties.
There have been debates about what position to take at international forums and then debates about how New Zealand should meet the commitments made and what part agriculture should play.
The debate going on in the select committee rooms at present over the Zero Carbon Bill directly relates to the Paris Agreement and how New Zealand will play its part.
The Paris Agreement was negotiated in the French winter of 2015 to replace the Kyoto Protocol, the previous global agreement to reduce the emissions of six greenhouse gases.
Paris followed the failed climate change conference in Copenhagen in 2009 which had been attended reluctantly by the Prime Minister at the time, John Key, on the basis that it always looked like it would flop.
Paris was an incredible event, according to National Party leader Simon Bridges, who attended as Associate Climate Change Minister.
“These conferences of the parties make you both incredibly cynical and somewhat hopeful that the world is working together on some sort of climate change solution.”
He said it was a mixture of high-pressure politics and theatrics (there was a shoe-thumping of a desk a la Nikita Khrushchev) and a carnival-like feel with thousands of people wondering between warehouses on the Parisian outskirts.
“You’ve got stalls from Greenpeace down to the smallest NGOs and the Amazon Rain Forest Protection Society. It’s like any multilateral organisation ... it’s hugely flawed but no one has come up with a better way to do it,” Bridges said.
The Paris Agreement settled on a target of limiting the rise in temperature this century to well below 2C above pre-industrial levels but with a higher hope to limit it to 1.5C.
“Paris is generally regarded as a real success,” said Bridges. “Albeit in truth the hard work is still to come.”
Whatever New Zealand’s pace on climate change, it has rarely been fast enough for the Green Party, which has long championed the cause of addressing climate change.
Climate Change Minister and Green Party co-leader James Shaw has been relatively patient in a consultative process over his bill, setting up New Zealand’s long-term target of zero carbon emissions by 2050, other targets for methane, and a Climate Change Commission to advise on how to get there.
But the Greens were by no means the first parliamentary advocates for action on climate change.
Sir Geoffrey Palmer was Environment Minister in the Fourth Labour Government, which commissioned that report from the Royal Society.
It was the same year the United Nations set up the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a significant date in the evolution of political responses to climate change.
Before getting his teeth into climate change, Palmer had been working on the Ozone Layer Protection Bill to cut emissions of substances that depleted the ozone.
Coincidentally, the chlorofluorocarbons and halons that were being targeted were greenhouse gases and led Palmer to say in his Greenprint for New Zealand book at the time that the measures in the ozone bill were “an important first step towards solving the much more complex problem of global warming”.
Those were his optimistic days.
“It is a very unfortunate thing that New Zealand hasn’t been able to lead on this in the way it should have been able to and I’m very sad about it,” he told the Herald this week.
“The real difficulty with climate change issues is that the political reaction to them has been at all times, I think, insufficient to the size of the problem.”
If it was not tackled with international action, there was no hope of dealing with it.
“The international action needs to be determined and it needs to be decisive and I am not sure those things will occur.”
The economic impact of dealing with climate change was “quite profound”, Palmer said. “Transforming the New Zealand economy is an enormously difficult job and the later you start the harder it is.”
His successor as Environment Minister in the Government that followed Labour was Simon Upton, now the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment, who is making a strong contribution to the climate debate.
Palmer wasn’t so happy about the fact Upton did not maintain Palmer’s strategy for dealing with climate change, which was published in August 1990.
The Labour Government established the aim of a 20 per cent reduction of 1990 carbon dioxide emissions by 2005 as an interim objective. It commissioned a group known as the New Zealand Climate Change Programme to develop a carbon dioxide reduction strategy based on energy management across all sectors.
The big international initiative of the 1990s was the Kyoto Protocol, debated in Japan, in which countries negotiated their commitments among others.
The big debate of the next decade was whether to introduce a simple tax on carbon or an emissions trading scheme. Labour initially favoured a carbon tax, as did the Greens, but it was not willing to proceed without wider support from United Future and New Zealand First.
Labour’s Environment Minister, David Parker, developed the Emissions Trading Scheme with the support of National. But National diluted it soon after gaining power, arguing the global financial crisis was not a time to overly restrain business.
The Emissions Trading Scheme is designed to use carrots and sticks — financial incentives and disincentives — to change polluting behaviour of big emitters. But critics say the New Zealand scheme does not work properly because the Government does not put a sinking cap on emissions.
And one of the big debates right now, as it has been for almost 20 years, is the role agriculture should play in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, both within the stated targets in the Zero Carbon Bill and within the Emissions Trading Scheme.
Some of the questions look set to be resolved in the bill in the next few months.
But in an area in which policy has been more accustomed to lurching than developing, any resolution may not necessarily be permanent.
