The stage for Lake Ōhau Village’s devastating fires was set by a combination of severe La Nina-influenced winds, unusually high temperatures, and pastures left dry by the warmest winter on record, an expert says.
It falls against the backdrop of a warming climate predicted to raise the risk of severe fire weather by three-fold in some parts of the nation.
Up to 50 structures were destroyed in the blaze at the idyllic lakeside Waitaki District town, fanned by strong, northwest winds locals described as “absolutely horrendous”.
Thought to have been sparked by overhead powerlines, the fire was likely fuelled by dried pastures before it spread to nearby forestry, Scion fire scientist Grant Pearce said.
It came as a freshly developing, moderate-strength La Nina climate system had been bringing stronger westerly to northwesterly winds, instead of the southwesterlies usually seen at this time of year.
Although the Mackenzie Basin was typically sheltered by this wind and weather from both directions, that hadn’t proven so over recent days.
And inland basins tended to be particularly affected by the sort of climate cycles that had delivered New Zealand its record warm winter.
“We’ve had a dry period over late winter, and into spring, where we haven’t had much rain, but cold temperatures and frost curing. That’s left a lot of dead grass on the ground ... and it hasn’t started greening up.
“So, what we have here is a combination of seasonal conditions, one of the warmest winter periods on record, and then dry conditions in that part of the country,” Pearce said.
Was this what we could expect under climate change?
Pearce saw two well-linked factors.
One was a general warming and drying pattern that’s expected to increase in some areas — including those “rain shadow” areas immediately to the east of mountain ranges, such as the Mackenzie Basin.
“The other key feature around climate change is greater extremes — that’s greater variation in heavy rainfall, right through to these really dry events as well ... So we expect more of these extreme days — and for conditions on these extreme days to be more severe.”
Climate scientist Professor Jim Salinger saw a clear link to climate change — that local temperatures were more than 10C above normal over the weekend was “very unusual” for early October — but also the handprint of a fast-arriving La Nina.
Rural fire damage already costs NZ about $67 million each year.
But modelling has indicated almost all areas face more risk, with the average length of fire seasons rising by about 70 per cent by the year 2040 — and by about 80 per cent by 2090.
Big droughts, too, would become increasingly common, especially in the north and east of the North Island, and east of the Southern Alps.
By the century’s end there could be more than 60 extra days over 25C in northern areas each year, and, even as soon as 2040, the average time in drought could double or triple.
Other research has suggested this scenario is somewhat here already: One study indicated the $1.3 billion drought which hit NZ in 2012-13 was 20 per cent more likely to have occurred than just over a century ago.
Although typically dry Gisborne, Marlborough and Canterbury would stay the most at risk of fire, in Wellington and coastal Otago it could double and triple to 30 days and 20 days per season, respectively.
And several degrees of heat rise, along with more and stronger westerly winds, doesn’t just mean more fires, but a different type.
What firefighters call “extreme fire” has dangerous features like spotting — where embers and other particles are hurled ahead of the fire front; fire tornadoes and whirls; and “blow-up” conditions, where the inferno explodes in size and intensity.
NZ hasn’t had many such fires so far, but research indicates they could double this century.
