National and NZ First have decided to play politics with climate change and kill the “feebate” proposal (NZ Herald, February 24). New electric vehicles and gas sippers would have cost less while new gas guzzlers would have cost more.
Playing politics, at the expense of effective emission reduction action, is at least stupid; it should be criminal.
As more people realise that climate change will affect us all — not just drought- and flood-stricken farmers — they will also realise that the political parties and their leaders who play political games at the expense of our environment will not be worthy of their vote come the election.
Lindsey Roke, Pakuranga Heights.
Vote accordingly
If we are going to deal with climate change in a meaningful way, we are going to need brave decisions by our politicians. Political expediency must not come into it, as clearly has recently happened with the canning of the electrical vehicle subsidy idea. The decisions are not always going to be the best for our economy, or popular with all sections of the population, but we need the politicians to find ways to deal with this crisis. Certainly the recent decision by some parties on the electric vehicle subsidies idea has shown if we want a government that takes this seriously, there are a couple of boxes not to tick in September.
Neil Anderson, Algies Bay.
China influence
Thanks to the Herald and to journalist Matt Nippert for the excellent article on China (NZ Herald, February 24).
The coronavirus, and its origins, has highlighted something far greater than a potential pandemic. China’s Communist Government’s human rights or lack thereof — already well documented; alleged invasions on home and office and car of China researcher Anne-Marie Brady — well reported; flexing of military muscles, with incursions in the South China Sea in particular; support of the world’s most rogue states; blatant stealing of intellectual property; financial incursions into several areas including the South Pacific and Africa, and thereby creating what have become known as death traps for those recipient countries; fiascos including Hong Kong, Taiwan, Mongolia, Tibet.
And now receiving not-so-veiled threats from the NZ ambassador of the super-power that is our largest trading partner, for daring to put measures in place to defend ourselves against a China-originated super-virus. Five million New Zealanders should have a very cold chill running down their spines.
Steve Clerk, Meadowbank.
Green light
Ashley Church (NZ Herald, February 24) is wrong that National will form the next government and for two good reasons.
An increasing number of New Zealanders are fed up with both major parties and, for that reason, there will be a significant shift of votes to the Greens.
And that it is a sure way of ridding New Zealand of the unpopular Winston Peters as a possible kingmaker.
James Shaw comes across as level headed and has a vast knowledge of how large companies and business practices work, and would make a more than capable deputy for Jacinda Ardern.
He has the right formula for addressing climate change — people first, the environment second and profit last, which is the opposite of National’s dogma that did so much damage to the poor people and the environment of New Zealand in its nine years of office. Finally, the financial support for the Greens in the last election was huge, almost eclipsing the National supporters’ donations.
Gary Hollis, Mellons Bay.
Going viral
Why is the World Health Organisation (WHO) continuing to encourage international travel? The WHO’s job must be to prevent a pandemic, but they are suggesting the one thing that will spread coronavirus as far and wide as possible.
I suspect that politics, and not medicine, is driving WHO’s crazy and stupid attitude.
In the meantime, New Zealand is doing the only sensible thing by maintaining a travel ban from the affected country.
The loss of tourism, education and exports is a challenge, but the preservation of health, and people’s lives, must come first.
Jeremy Hall, Opaheke.
Scooter fail
What will it take for manufacturers of e-scooters to realise those stupid little stands do not secure the scooters in an upright position? All they need to do is see how many have fallen over on our footpaths, interrupting the flow of pedestrians.
Chris van Ryn, Auckland Central.
Latin lovers
It’s sad to hear that New Zealand children will no longer be able to study Latin. Latin has many practical benefits. It will help you with your English spelling (so far I’ve used at least seven Latin-derived words in this letter) and when dealing with your doctor (medical vocabulary, like much other technical, scientific and legal language, relies heavily on Latin). If you want to learn French, Italian, or Spanish, Latin helps.
Latin is not elitist. It is not difficult — for English speakers, much easier to learn than Chinese, Japanese, or Arabic — and for hundreds of years quite stupid little boys were regularly schooled in it.
But worst of all, we are cutting a link with about 1200 years of western civilisation, a term I refuse to abandon just because it has been temporarily hijacked.
Just as a child has a multitude of grandparents and great-grandparents, so modern New Zealand derives from many cultures.
They should not be seen as competitive but as co-operative (help, more Latin words).
Alexandra Barratt, Hamilton.
Restless wait
Sleepyhead’s $14.billion estate in north Waikato (NZ Herald, February 24) is a wonderful scheme to draw a significant industry and its working population out of Auckland.
It’s what some of those industrial, entrepreneurial Quakers did in England’s Victorian era. Businesses like Cadbury and Sunlight come to mind. Businesses that ultimately became almost towns with all the facilities to keep working families happy, healthy and cared for continue to this day.
Why the wait? Authorities, government and iwi should be jumping at the chance and minimising red tape.
Richard Kean, Ngongotaha.
Myths of time
Once again we have left myths: farmers were subsidised and superannuation is efficient. Dairy farmers lent hundreds of millions (billions in today’s currency) more to government at 1 per cent than they ever borrowed. Governments used this to build infrastructure — power stations, hospitals, roads etc. Farmers subsidised the rest of New Zealand, not visa versa.
It was the Labour Government of the 80s that set out to destroy farmers. The co-operative structure of the dairy industry made it harder to destroy than sheep and beef.
This forced many to change to dairying and the dairy industry doubled. The entire export sector was hit by Labour’s policies. Without a wealth-producing base, poverty hit many.
A recent analysis by Sydney University economist Dr Cameron Murray found the pension is 20 times more efficient at delivering retirement incomes than their superannuation system. Superannuation hits low income people hardest but does not reduce their reliance on the pension. Australia is currently reviewing the system and many call for it to be scrapped. Thank goodness Muldoon got rid of it here.
Maureen Coxhead, Flat Bush.
Super rate
It was reported Social Development Minister Carmel Sepolini said super would remain at the 66 per cent of the average wage, the guaranteed minimum for superannuation (NZ Herald, February 25).
This implies that each superannuitant receives 66 per cent of the average wage. Not so. The minister is either misreported or is ignorant of the facts.
The 66 per cent applies to a couple and is based on “the average ordinary time wage after tax” ... of an individual wage earner. Each superannuitant receives nearer 30 per cent, not 66 per cent, of the average wage. It’s nice to see a small increase planned for April but let’s get our facts straight.
Grant Withers, Te Atatu Peninsula.
