CO2 absorption Climate change could be worse than models have predicted. In a study published by Nature magazine, scientists from Western Sydney University have found that some forests are already at the limit of the amount of carbon they can extract from the air. They found that while mature trees could consume an additional 12 per cent of carbon at levels 38 per cent above normal, the majority of extra carbon was emitted back into the atmosphere.While studies show younger trees are proficient at storing extra carbon, models based on the assumption that mature trees will do the same could be undermined.
Pell investigatedCardinal George Pell is being investigated over new child abuse allegations made by a different accuser, according to reports. The Victorian Police have been secretly investigating the claims, according to an exclusive report from the Herald Sun. The accuser is a male who works in a professional role who made claims about alleged child sex abuse that date back to the 1970s. Last week, the Australian High Court quashed Pell’s five convictions for child sex abuse in a unanimous decision. Bernie backs BidenBernie Sanders endorsed Joe Biden’s presidential campaign yesterday, encouraging his progressive supporters to rally behind the presumptive Democratic nominee in an urgent bid to defeat President Donald Trump. “I am asking all Americans, I’m asking every Democrat, I’m asking every independent, I’m asking a lot of Republicans, to come together in this campaign to support your candidacy, which I endorse,” the Vermont senator said in a virtual event with Biden. The backing came less than a week after Sanders ended his presidential campaign, which was centred around progressive policies such as universal health care. Cyclone impact The biggest issues confronting disaster officials in Tonga following last week’s battering from Cyclone Harold are the state of wharves on ’Eua and Ha’apai and some of the coastal roads on both ’Eua and Tongatapu. When the severe cyclone hit, it coincided with a king tide, which caused considerable coastal damage. The chief executive of the National Emergency Management Office, Paula Ma’u, said that on ’Eua, this wrecked a number of houses and offices and also eroded a graveyard. He said some of the bodies had been recovered but others had been swept out to sea. Ma’u said people whose homes were inundated on ’Eua and also around Tongatapu’s Fanga’uta Lagoon, had been rehoused in tents and supplied with kitchen equipment.
