An OECD report says climate change can increase the cost of supplying infrastructure, reports Bill Bennett
Climate change poses a threat to infrastructure. Weather that is increasingly severe, extreme heat and rising sea levels are the most obvious direct threats.
At the same time, we lack a precise knowledge of how future climate change might evolve. That makes long-term planning difficult.
There are many uncertainties. The OECD’s climate resilient infrastructure report says global averages and changes to measures such as average temperature or rainfall point to the scale of the threat.
Yet how climate change affects a particular asset, say a road or a reservoir, is uncertain and context specific.
While we have some understanding of the big picture changes, the report warns: “Key aspects of the climate system that affect regional and local projections are not yet sufficiently well understood and modelled.”
To complicate matters, the report warns that the various global trends can interact with each other and with local conditions to cause even more extreme impacts. And on top of this there are risks from events cascading through infrastructure networks.
Another area of concern is that climate change can increase the cost of supplying infrastructure.
If, say, the asset is a reservoir, it will need to be larger to address greater variation in the amount of rain captured.
The report says these impacts will be particularly important for cities, as they rely upon extensive infrastructure networks for access to water, energy and food.
Governments, authorities and planners can minimise the risks and uncertainty by developing climate resilient infrastructure.
Done well this can cut the frequency and severity of disruption while reducing the need to invest in back-ups.
By preparing for climate change from the outset, infrastructure owners can increase the life of their asset while reducing repair and maintenance costs.
It will take longer for climate change to render the infrastructure obsolete.
An alternative approach is adaptive management.
A hydroelectric dam might have a design life of 70 to 100 years. There’s a wide variety of possible climate outcomes over that time. Preparing for all possibilities is prohibitively expensive; building in flexibility from the start so that adjustments can be made over time will increase the dam’s lifespan.
