The ambition of the Paris agreement is to limit climate change to 1.5 degrees of global warming above pre-industrial levels. The 2018 Special Report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) on Global Warming of 1.5 degrees states that achieving this will require an economic change with “no documented historic precedent” in terms of speed and scale. We need to reduce global emissions by 45 per cent by 2030, and be net zero by at least 2050, ideally sooner. The IPCC estimates this will require a 600 per cent increase in capital for low-carbon technologies and energy efficiency by 2050.
Even with 1.5 degrees of warming it’s estimated that the implications of climate change to the natural environmental are material, for example:
●4 per cent of all land will undergo a transformation from one ecosystem to another, with 13 per cent transforming at 2 degrees (primary industries account for approximately 8 per cent of New Zealand’s GDP)
●We will lose 70-90 per cent of coral reefs, with 99 per cent lost at a temperature rise of two degrees (an important source of food and income in the Oceania region)
●Global annual fishery catch will decrease by 1.5 million tonnes, with a decrease of 3 million tonnes at 2 degrees (accounting for 0.7 per cent of New Zealand’s GDP and 3.2 per cent of export in 20155)
●An ice-free arctic summer will occur once per century at 1.5 degrees compared to once per decade at 2 degrees
●At 2 degrees, sea level rise is estimated to hit approximately 1m by 2100, with 68,000 buildings in NZ located on land below this level with a replacement value of $19 billion.
● An estimated 170,000 buildings sit within 3m of current sea-level and would be impacted by storm tides and wave floods, with a replacement value of $52 billion. This is approximately 10 per cent of all private dwellings in New Zealand.
These estimates don’t include the costs of adapting other infrastructure such as
transport. It also only considers the impacts of sea-level rise. Climate change will also cause changes in rainfall, extreme weather events, heatwaves, and a significant number of other climate hazards. It will impact health, food and water supply, tourism, migration, domestic security, and significantly alter life as we know it, even at 1.5 or 2 degrees. Co-dependencies within our economy will lead to further impacts that cannot yet be understood. The banking sector alone lends around $190 billion in home mortgages, which cannot be withdrawn as risks change like insurance.
There are also emerging risks from not setting out realistic decarbonisation plans aligning to a two-degree future. These include increasing risk of litigation or exclusion from international trade as a penalty for slow action. In other words, there is a very significant cost to inaction — the base case is not the status quo.
These are the impacts of a 2 degree world. Current global proposed mitigation plans have us on track to 3 degrees of warming or higher. Potential damage is not linear with an increase in temperature — 2 degrees is significantly worse than 1.5 degrees. At 3 degrees, things get exponentially worse and we reach the point of no return.
Source: Sustainable Finance Forum interim report
