At the end of 2020 it is clear that for Auckland to be green, it can’t rely on nature alone: truly green cities are created, and this happens through planning, policy, and vision.
We have to respond to Covid-19 with economic growth that does not degrade our environment for our children.
Auckland Council responded in July when it unanimously passed the Te Tāruke-ā-Tāwhiri: Auckland’s Climate Plan. It aims to halve greenhouse-gas emissions by 2030.
The plan is bold and necessary and well supported. Of the almost 3000 submissions, 91per cent thought the framework either fully, or partially, takes Auckland in the right direction.
The plan identifies a long list of actions, but addressing road transport is pre-eminent. Indeed, some describe transport as the “low-hanging fruit” of emissions reduction.
As one of two lead agencies responsible for Auckland’s transport system, Auckland Transport welcomes the challenge. We support the climate plan and the council’s leadership. But we do not underestimate the scale of the change.
Council modelling suggests transport emissions need to fall 64per cent to achieve the goal of 50per cent reduction in Auckland’s total emissions by 2030.
There are more Aucklanders travelling and they are travelling more; Auckland’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions grew by 7per cent from 2009 to 2018. Transport emissions grew 11per cent.
All of this is despite a 75per cent increase in public transport trips over the past decade and a 16per cent increase in trips on bikes since 2016.
What about the next decade? The population is expected to grow another 16per cent and one would expect kilometres travelled and emissions to rise again.
Thankfully, it’s not business as usual. Aucklanders and the Government are investing $28 billion in transport projects such as the City Rail Link, the Eastern Busway, the extension of the Northern Busway, Puhinui to the airport, and electrification of rail from Papakura to Pukekohe.
But is this enough to meet the 50per cent overall emissions reduction targets set out in the Climate Plan? No.
Experts at the Auckland Forecasting Centre recently calculated the emissions savings all the planned and likely interventions could achieve. First, I asked them to list all the actions that could be delivered without recourse to new legislation or central government leadership. This includes transitioning to a low-emissions bus fleet, completing scheduled cycle, bus and rail projects, ongoing implementation of the Unitary Plan, creating low-emission vehicle zones, charging stations for EVs, and education about cycling and walking.
These interventions would reduce emissions by less than 5per cent by 2030.
Next, we looked at what steps other agencies or the Government could lead. These include providing incentives to accelerate the shift to privately owned EVs, increased use of biofuels and improved regulations on vehicle fuel-efficiency standards.
These three measures bring a little over a 20per cent emissions reduction.
It’s still not enough.
We modelled two other interventions that could provide the difference: road pricing on motorways and arterial routes (delivering around a 16 per cent emissions reduction depending on the price); and lifting fuel taxes to incorporate part of the cost of emissions.
Measures like this have historically had little appeal and come with important implications for social equity. It’s likely that families in hardship will need additional financial support as part of a just transition.
But without these sorts of measures – incentivising a switch to public transport, walking and cycling, to travelling less or to EVs – it’s simply not possible to achieve the target GHG reductions.
Auckland Transport supports the climate plan but the scale of the challenge requires more than what is already planned and requires more than what Auckland Transport alone can deliver.
Transport may be a low-hanging fruit for reducing emissions reduction. But the branches are high and Auckland needs more ladders to pick it.
