Climate change protests
Tens of thousands of environmental activists staged a rally outside Germany’s parliament yesterday, ahead of the country’s national election tomorrow, to demand that politicians take stronger action to curb climate change. The protest outside the Reichstag in Berlin was part of a string of rallies around the world, from Japan, Indian and Nigeria to Greece, Italy and Britain — amid dire warnings the planet faces dangerous temperature rises unless greenhouse gas emissions are cut sharply in coming years. Swedish activist Greta Thunberg, 18, addressed the Berlin rally from a stage, telling the crowd that voting is important but must be coupled with protests that put politicians under constant pressure.
Vanuatu makes global plea The Vanuatu government has launched a global campaign to seek a climate change advisory opinion from the International Court of Justice or ICJ. The World Court’s previous advisory opinions have been instrumental in establishing international laws, such as the right to self-determination, prevention of genocide and nuclear disarmament. In a statement, Vanuatu said current levels of action and support for vulnerable developing countries are insufficient. It said it wants the ICJ to clarify the responsibilities for climate change under international law. Vanuatu aims to build a strong coalition with fellow Pacific Islands and other vulnerable nations to drive the initiative at the United Nations level.
Fossil footprints reshape history Humans reached the Americas at least 7000 years earlier than previously thought, according to new findings. The topic of when the continent was first settled from Asia has been controversial for decades. Many researchers are sceptical of evidence for humans in the North American interior much earlier than 16,000 years ago. Now, a team working in New Mexico has found scores of human footprints that have been dated by US Geological Survey staff to between 23,000 and 21,000 years old. The footprints were formed in soft mud on the margins of a shallow lake which now forms part of Alkali Flat in White Sands. The research has been published in the journal Science.
