Climate Change Minister James Shaw early this year warned ministers the Government did not have enough staff or funding to progress key parts of the climate change agenda, saying policies would need to be dropped.
Shaw then wrote to Environment Minister David Parker in April saying already-agreed decisions “will not be able to progress as directed by Cabinet with this level of funding”.
Despite securing additional funding in the 2021 Budget, Shaw had to work with Parker in June to “reprioritise” the climate change work programme to fit the Ministry for the Environment’s (MfE) staffing.
The letter, and its policy response, were released to the Herald under the Official Information Act.
The episode shows public service tensions over a lack of staff to create policy advice.
This particular case only relates to the climate change work done at MfE, which looks after policy such as planning, and publishing the Government’s emissions plans.
Shaw’s Managed Retreat Bill appears the main victim of this staffing shortage.
The Bill, looking at ways of shifting settlements vulnerable to climate change, was to be introduced soon — it’s now not expected before 2023.
The full list of policies being rescheduled and reprioritised was redacted.
The heavily redacted letter made the case that the MfE’s climate policy time was chronically understaffed.
Shaw attached two charts.
One showed the number of people working on climate change policy at the MfE last year was just over 80 (full-time equivalent, FTE), and not expected to rise in the next two years.
The number of climate change staff at MfE stood at just over 20 FTEs in 2014, 30 in 2015 and just over 40 the year the Government took office.
Funding for MfE’s climate change work has also been a struggle. In 2014/15 it had $11 million for climate policy, and $11.3m the next year.
In 2017/18, the budget was $16.5m, and it currently stands at $25.2m.
A new Cabinet paper was written in June on the “reprioritisation of the climate change work programme”. The details are not public.
There has been frustration in Wellington that climate change policy has been under resourced.
This was apparent in the release of an early version of the Government’s Emissions Reductions Plan.
That document presented possible policies for the transport sector, but was light on policy ideas anywhere else, which has been cited as evidence agencies weren’t equipped for the work.
