Many Kiwis likely
to be put off buying
near rivers or sea
With the annual cost of river flooding tipped to only rise due to climate change, some real estate agents in areas hit by slips and floods say more regular weather events won’t stop some people buying properties for views and outlooks, although the buyer pool will likely get smaller.
As Nelson recovers from landslides and the bursting of the Maitai River, which led to dozens of homes being evacuated, a new analysis shows the average annual cost of river flooding to residences already tops $100 million and is expected to rise significantly.
The analysis, by global data-driven organisations CoreLogic and Munich Re, shows the $100m figure could rise by more than 20 per cent by 2050 and by more than 30 per cent by 2100.
The analysis also says the 11 per cent of residential property value exposed to river flood risk will increase to 17 per cent by 2050.
Regions most at risk include Otago, which the analysis says accounts for 5 per cent of the total national residential property value but which has 15 per cent of the national annual average river flood loss.
Auckland and Wellington are likely to see increased flood risk, and Hawke’s Bay, Manawatu-Wanganui and Marlborough will see some of the highest increases in the average annual flood loss by 2050.
Munich Re, a German multinational insurance company, has a grim outlook for New Zealand, with Australia managing director Scott Hawkins saying we will see an increase in the frequency and severity of weather events due to climate change and communities and people need to manage their exposure to climate risks.
“Weather-related disasters might in sum become as destructive to New Zealand as earthquakes.”
Glyn Delany, a top agent for Summit Real Estate in Nelson, told OneRoof many people were nervous.
Nelson had a number of high-end properties on hills where the impact of slips on values wouldn’t be known until people went to market.
“There’s a bit of stigma that will come along with that and the unknown ground conditions and what’s happened ... there’s been so many slips and so many homes that have been affected and some are destroyed, unfortunately.”
Probably some would-be buyers now wouldn’t look at a house for sale near the Maitai River, or any other river, he said.
But while insurance costs will likely rise, people keen to live by the sea or on the hills are likely to be wealthy and can afford the risk.
“The general public, I think, will shy away from homes that are next to rivers and probably shy away from sea-level rise as well.
“The people that are nervous people, they’ll sell and move. But I think those people will be replaced by people that are willing to take the risk because they want to live in a home that has the view they’ve always wanted.”
Another part of the country that took a weather hammering last year was Ashburton, but Kim Miller, owner of Ray White Ashburton, says though the state highway was cut off and some homes were damaged in Hinds, most Ashburton homes were not affected. Weather events in years past had resulted in some notes being added to titles with regard to flooding but those were quite historic.
“This more recent weather event, all it did was make buyers ask, especially if they were out of region, was the property affected by the water?”
People are savvy and have access to a lot of information, such as Lim reports, Miller says. He also says it’s the responsibility of agents to disclose a lot of such information to buyers.
Back in Nelson, Delany says people who buy homes by the sea understand the risks but want to live there.
Some experts, however, say homeowners should be worried about climate change and while many are in denial, existing homeowners in at-risk areas could find their homes in less demand and prices dropping.
Those people might not be able to borrow against at-risk homes in the future.
