Leaders from 18 Pacific countries are set to arrive in Suva, Fiji, this week for what may be the most significant Pacific Islands Forum of recent times. Michael Neilson reports
“Machine guns, fighter jets ... are not our primary security concern. The single greatest threat to our very existence is climate change,” Fiji Defence Minister Inia Seruiratu told delegates at a recent defence conference in Singapore.
The speech was taking aim at rising strategic interest in the Pacific, particularly from superpowers China and the United States, and the relative lack of interest in the issue that to them mattered most.
Increasingly severe tropical cyclones in Fiji have displaced thousands of people in recent years, causing millions of dollars in damage, and rising seas are already forcing evacuations of coastal villages.
It is a similar story across all low-lying Pacific island countries, and one their leaders have been shouting about at every international forum possible.
Yet for the past decade Australia, traditionally one of the Pacific’s closest partners, has been regarded by many there as the worst listener.
The new government, under Anthony Albanese, however, has promised to turn this relationship around and become a leader on climate action, potentially also pressuring New Zealand to take its commitments even further.
Leaders from 18 Pacific countries — including Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern and Albanese — arrive in Suva this week for the 51st Pacific Islands Forum leaders’ meeting. It is the first in-person meeting since Tuvalu in 2019, before the pandemic.
The forum is a means to discuss regional issues, from security to fishing stocks to combating environmental issues and climate change — and now Covid-19.
Chaired by Fijian Prime Minister Frank Bainimarama, this forum will also seek endorsement of the Blue Pacific Continent strategy — a regional roadmap to 2050.
Regional security and rising geopolitical tensions — stirred by China and the US — are expected to dominate many discussions.
Recent tensions stem back to a security arrangement signed between the Solomon Islands and China in March.
The forum is the first opportunity for the Solomon Islands agreement, and wider concerns, to be discussed at this regional level.
The increasing attention on China has also raised questions about the strength of relations New Zealand and Australia have with the Pacific countries.
Dr Iati Iati, Pacific security fellow at the Centre for Strategic Studies at Victoria University of Wellington, said he disagreed with sentiments New Zealand and Australia had “not done enough”, with Australia still the largest aid donor to the region (New Zealand is the second) and with the highest number of diplomats.
Rather, it was quality, not quantity, of involvement, he said.
“And this requires a very good understanding of the region.”
This included addressing trade and development concerns, the efficacy of the regional seasonal employer (RSE) schemes, and stronger action on climate change.
Typically, representatives from 18 countries outside the forum, including China, the United States and the European Union, are present during the week and are included in an official post-forum dialogue.
They were excluded this year to allow forum members to focus on unity, particularly in light of the threat by five Micronesian countries last year to leave the forum over leadership issues.
Iati said the exclusion of observer states would “play well for the Western countries”.
“America probably won’t mind sitting this one out as they’ll still have Australia and New Zealand in there championing similar policies.”
Iati said discussions would likely be around setting clear boundaries about security matters the forum can get involved with, without affecting the “hard-fought sovereignty Pacific Island countries have gained”.
Ardern has stated repeatedly the need to respect the sovereignty of Pacific nations when it comes to determining their own bilateral security arrangements, while also applying a regional lens.
“We can be country neutral in approach, but have a Pacific bias on the values we apply for these engagements,” she said at the Lowy Institute in Sydney on Thursday.
She has also stated New Zealand is “strongly opposed” to any militarisation in the Pacific, and that any regional issues needed to be discussed at the forum, as per the Biketawa Declaration signed in 2000.
“The model exists, we need to use it,” she said.
Ardern also said she saw the forum as a means to establish region-wide climate change mitigation projects.
“While we all have a concern, and rightly so, about any moves towards militarisation of our region, that must surely be matched by a concern for those who experience the violence of climate change.”
Ardern said that was why New Zealand had committed $1.3 billion over four years towards climate change, with at least 50 per cent going to the Pacific.
“But there is an opportunity in my mind for the Pacific Island Forum to play a role in establishing region-wide mitigation projects that climate funding can support.”
Dr Anna Powles, a Massey University expert in Pacific security, said it was clear Pacific island countries were “frustrated” at how strategic attention from the superpowers had distracted from climate change.
“The fact no post-forum dialogue will be held is clearly an indication they are frustrated at how geopolitical issues have been dominating the agenda,” Powles said.
