A climate change sceptic
It’s so much easier when you decide a problem like climate change isn’t real, that today is what matters, not yesterday, and certainly not tomorrow.
Although he wouldn’t call himself a reformed climate change denier, Tokoroa farmer and climate action advocate George Moss says he’s certainly a reformed sceptic.
“[Before] I was at the ‘don’t want to believe it’ stage, so you look for those things that justify the status quo.”
It was a nice place to be, for him, and for those who still believe long-term changes in global temperatures and weather patterns aren’t because we’re all burning too many fossil fuels.
“If you can convince yourself something isn’t real”, Moss says, “you don’t have to convince yourself to do something”.
“We’ve seen it with Covid, too. It’s a lot easier to say it’s not real. Then you don’t have to ask yourself, ‘What are you going to do about it?’ ”
For Moss, a Dairy NZ climate change ambassador who, with wife Sharon, runs two small dairy farms and a smaller dairy support and beef farm, acceptance didn’t crash through like a winter rainmaker.
It was more like a gentle spring shower.
”[It wasn’t] wake up one morning and a complete shift in attitude. It was a slow process. You probably have to go back 20 years, when the first of the noises were becoming quite public — ice caps melting and things like that.”
Still, the comfort of ignorance was tough to shake, with stories of Greenland “never having had more snow”, or ice building up in Antarctica, welcome because they supported the position he so wanted to hold on to.
“We’d have a cold snap, or a cold winter, and you’d say, ‘Oh it’s a variation of a planet that’s always changed over the millennia’, which it has. But what’s happening now is it’s changing at a very rapid rate, which hasn’t happened before.”
By about 2014 the father-of-one was reading widely on climate change, and listening to scientists “who actually understood the science”.
“One of the things I’ve learned over the years — and Covid falls into this category too — if one accepts the word of experts in this field it is a whole lot less stressful.”
His reading had made him a fan of graphs; those showing carbon dioxide concentration or ice core data left little doubt something was happening.
”[If] you look at the CO2 concentration, and the pace of warming over a couple of thousand years, in my view it’s compelling now.
“And the ice core data ... that takes us back in time to what the climate was like at different CO2 levels.
“I found that data interesting because that’s an ability to look back through history over many millennia.”
Add to the mix, us.
A warmer world will change lives for the worse, with food security, where we live, our health and the environment in the firing line, the 63-year-old says.
“We’re literally seeing temperatures in places now where healthy human life is compromised.
“Once you start to hit 50C, which Baghdad has seen occasionally, if you’re not inside in front of an air conditioner, human life is vulnerable. Let alone nature.”
It’s a long way from the heart of ancient Mesopotamia, but things are changing in south Waikato, too.
“The climate patterns are significantly different to when we first came down here 25 years ago.”
Summer’s hotter, autumn drier, frost still forms in winter but less often or severe, and dry spells — even droughts — are more regular, Moss says.
“They’re almost the norm, whereas they were the exception ... you start realising there’s a problem.”
The challenge is for everyone, because success couldn’t just be about a “straight reduction” in the agriculture sector of greenhouse gases, but how New Zealand remained a competitive trading nation when those buying our products would also be managing greenhouse gases in their supply chain.
“It’s the community beyond the farm gate that ultimately will wear that price if we get it wrong.”
On his farms, the focus is on “measuring and chasing” genetics — efficient cows leave a lower greenhouse-gas footprint — and finding efficiencies, such as stopping cultivation on land used for feed crop.
“We don’t plough land. If you kill the soil, you release soil carbon ... we just do a straight spray and drill [a machine puts the seed in the ground], and sometimes we don’t even spray.
“And we still get a very good crop.”
They also factored fuel consumption for their farm vehicles, running only two small motorbikes.
“And my wife walks everywhere.”
As part of the Emissions Reduction Plan, agricultural emissions will be priced from 2025.
Cabinet will decide later this year whether to accept the He Waka Eke Noa-Primary Sector Climate Action Partnership’s preferred system, or use another.
The coming change means an increasing number of farmers are looking for advice on how to adapt, although there are always holdouts, Moss says.
“They’re going to get caught anyway. There is going to be a pricing mechanism.”
Climate change deniers have also called, one recently claiming some scientists back their views.
“I went back and said, ‘If by chance the majority of the scientists had got this wrong, the worst outcome is we’re going to improve the planet as we do away with fossil fuels and pollution’.”
And then there are those who simply don’t want to be told what to do as society faces a battle between collective good and individual rights, Moss says.
“That’s the part people are grappling with. They’ll say, ‘Oh, I don’t want to do that, I’m gonna be told by the Government to do this, I’m not gonna be regulated to do that, I’ll protest’ and you’ve got governments of all sorts of colours saying, ‘Well, actually in the collective good we need to do this — and the climate change falls into that space’.
“We all agree something should be done, but nobody quite wants to be the person who does it.”
