‘Real risk’ that some areas could become uninsurable
New Zealand insurers have strong enough balance sheets to weather the recent storms but will likely have to pass on the rising cost of covering the damage wrought by an increasingly erratic environment.
Insurers had been paring back their levels of capital from a peak during the Covid-19 pandemic but kept the solvency margins well above the regulatory minimum at 174per cent in the March 2022 year.
That’s in contrast to the Canterbury earthquakes in the early 2010s, which tipped over Western Pacific Insurance and prompted a Government bailout for AMI Insurance.
Listed insurer Tower was among those stretched by the Canterbury quakes, repeatedly lifting its provisioning to pay out increasingly expensive claims and prompting much consideration on how it would navigate its way through the earthquake response.
Tower ended up receiving claims totalling $953.5 million net of Earthquake Commission payments, of which reinsurance covered $733.7m.
On September 30, it still had 36 outstanding claims from the series of temblors that devastated the country’s second-biggest city more than a decade ago.
The general insurer is in a stronger position now, touting a solvency ratio of 205per cent before the recent flooding in Northland and Auckland, followed almost immediately by Cyclone Gabrielle.
Tower received 5325 claims relating to the initial flooding, and has said it expects the ultimate cost will be between $95m and $125m, which will largely be covered by reinsurance.
The insurer has so far received 2200 claims for damage caused by the cyclone, but has yet to estimate the bill, which should similarly be covered by reinsurance.
Tower has about 9.5per cent of the market, with 319,000 customers.
IAG, which operates the State and NZI brands among others, estimated the gross cost for the flooding would be in excess of A$350m ($381m) from more than 21,000 claims.
Suncorp, which runs Vero, had said reinsurance would cap its losses on the flooding at $50m from almost 12,000 claims.
Both the ASX-listed companies haven’t released their early estimates of the cost of the cyclone yet.
Whatever the weatherTower has stressed its resilience, and this week said it was in talks with reinsurers to reinstate cover to make sure it had enough protection for another two catastrophe events.
Chief executive Blair Turnbull said it was a tough environment for reinsurers globally, with the increasing severity of storms and cyclones.
“But when they look at Tower, they do like what they see. They recognise that we need our technology and data and risk-based pricing. They know our history — 154 years old — we’re not going anywhere.
“We’re committed to Aotearoa and the Pacific and they recognise it,” Turnbull said after last week’s annual meeting in Auckland.
“We’ve worked with them for many, many years, decades, to put the reinsurance programmes in place. And it’s a very comprehensive reinsurance programme.”
Tower’s shares dropped 13per cent in February as the insurer trimmed this year’s earnings and dividend forecast as it assessed the cost of claims and extended its reinsurance cover.
Forsyth Barr raised its forecast for Tower’s reinsurance costs by 18per cent, expecting an annual bill of $81.8m in the September 2023 year, rising to $101m in the 2025 financial year. It had previously forecast Tower’s reinsurance costs to be $69.2m in the current financial year, rising to $85.3m in 2025.
Grant Davies, an investment adviser at Hamilton Hindin Greene, said those uncertainties were hanging over Tower’s head, but the firm was showing itself to be resilient to those kinds of events.
“So far, Tower’s holding up okay in the face of those claims,” he said.
Forsyth Barr analyst James Lindsay said Tower’s close focus on pricing meant those costs should eventually be passed on to customers, ultimately protecting earnings in future years.
“Tower made 49 targeted rating and underwriting adjustments in the first quarter of 2023. In our opinion, this represents a good signal that Tower is continually targeting a pass-through of inflationary costs,” Lindsay said in a note.
The only way is upThe price of dwelling insurance has climbed at an average annual pace of 20per cent since the September 2010 earthquake first shook Christchurch, outpacing the 4.7per cent pace of increase in the price of contents insurance and the 3.2per cent pace for car insurance.
The consumers price index rose at an average annual pace of 2.7per cent over that time.
The Reserve Bank’s September financial stability report noted rising premium increases as a result of general inflation and increasingly expensive reinsurance renewals, which could lead to under-insurance.
“If the cost of living outpaces incomes for a prolonged period of time, New Zealanders may reduce their insurance cover, which would leave them exposed to more costly losses,” the report said.
At the same time, insurers are pressing policymakers to act faster on adapting to climate change as high-risk areas eventually become uninsurable.
Charlie Howe, chief executive of Civic Financial Services, said there was a real risk at some stage that insurance coverage for certain areas would no longer be available.
Civic Financial Services oversees the Local Authority Protection Programme, which supports member councils replacing infrastructure after natural disasters.
Howe said Hastings and Wairoa councils were members of the programme, and the fund had enough capacity to support those local authorities.
He said, in his personal view, there were questions about how to support uninsured people who often didn’t have the ability to move away from increasingly risky places.
“And even those who can afford to insure themselves today, I’m not sure that’s going to be available for them in the future,” Howe said.
