Auckland’s wettest day, New Zealand’s most damaging cyclone and a fresh bout of severe weather that doused Mangawhai with nearly 400mm of rainfall in less than half a day.
Given all of these events will bear a climate change handprint, it’s little surprise that search trends have shown spikes of people Googling about it.
Our summer of storms has similarly triggered a flurry of climate coverage in the media, while also bringing the crisis, and all of the enormous questions it poses, into sharper political focus ahead of the election.
For climate change psychologists who’ve long been tracking Kiwis’ perceptions, there’s plenty to ponder.
Has the ground of public consciousness — and with it, our expectations of lawmakers and polluters — dramatically shifted?
Will this really bring the transformative change that the Christchurch Earthquake did for our society?
Or, does our climate concern wane after every extreme event, regardless of the rainfall records they smash, to the point that we’re normalising our largest existential threat?
The bad news, the researchers say, is we’re prone to care less, the further we move from disastrous events.
And yes, we’re notoriously adept at normalising risks like climate change, even when they’re right in front of us — just take Covid-19 and the 21 new deaths it just contributed to in one week.
The good news, at least, is that Kiwis do at least have high awareness about climate change, and its potential to affect us all personally.
IAG’s latest annual survey indicated three quarters of us felt we were seeing more frequent floods — up from 57 per cent only five years ago — while eight in 10 saw climate change as personally important.
While the havoc of the last two months may have prompted Climate Change Minister James Shaw to press officials on whether our sluggish adaptation efforts can be sped up, IAG’s polling had already been showing rising expectations for the Government to go harder.
More Kiwis were looking to the Government for direction, it found, and also to councils, to invest in smarter infrastructure and prevent development in risky places.
A recent Herald poll found nearly 60 per cent of Kiwis thought the country should take stronger action — with around a quarter “strongly” agreeing New Zealand should be bolder.
Although younger people were more likely than older Kiwis to back stronger action, that sentiment fell generally evenly across age groups.
To Victoria University’s Professor Marc Wilson, there was little doubt Kiwis cared much more today than even 10 years ago.
Back then, data gleaned from the longitudinal NZ Attitudes and Values Study (NZAVS) suggested just over half of people were at least a little worried about climate change.
“Last year, that spiked to almost two in three of the 30,000 folks who took part,” Wilson said.
“That is a big jump.”
This might be unsurprising if we consider that seven of the eight warmest years on Niwa’s books have all occurred since 2013 — or that insurers just chalked up another record year for extreme weather claims, even before the billions of dollars of fresh damage this summer has wrought.
NZAVS data also reflected small but incremental increases in Kiwis’ certainty about anthropogenic climate change.
As at 2020, NZAVS research found just two per cent of participants disagreed that climate change was real, with another 6 per cent “doubtful”.
While the proportion of “deeply concerned” people appeared to have risen over the 2010s, Wilson said it appeared to have plateaued since 2020, perhaps because of the pandemic.
Did he feel this summer would reboot the trend?
That wasn’t so straightforward.
“We know several things: first, peoples’ experience of the weather — as in what they feel outside — is important for their attitudes to the bigger picture issue of climate,” Wilson explained.
“This, of course, is hugely subjective, insensitive — can you really tell a difference either way of 1C? — and dependent on your context.”
In general, people tended to be more sensitive to clear patterns — such as what we’ve seen over the past few weeks — than one-off occurrences.
Still, research also suggested that events as catastrophic as Gabrielle could act like a cold slap to the face, even if the effect was temporary.
Wilson offered a few reasons for that, which were well-known in psychology.
“One is that the emotional intensity of an experience dims over time — it’s called Fading Affect Bias,” he said.
“For some, maybe many, and definitely not all folks, we’ll remember our house flooding as bad, but it’ll lose the acuteness of it.”
University of Auckland psychologist Professor Niki Harre added: “Yes, recent events are likely to be at the forefront of our attention.
“Part of this is because they are featured in the media and everyone is talking about them. As time passes, the widespread conversation wanes and so for most people their attention to the issue wanes.
“Of course, for people with long-term damage from weather events, this is not the case.
“But it is like any loss, over time the outpouring of support reduces as for other people, different issues are now at the forefront of their attention.”
And then, of course, we were also prone to becoming “habituated” to climate-driven events.
One much-cited US study sampled more than two billion geolocated tweets to assess what kinds of temperatures generated the most posts about weather.
They found that people often tweeted when temperatures were unusual for a particular place and time of year — a particularly warm March or unexpectedly freezing winter, for instance.
However, if the same weather persisted year after year, it generated less comment on Twitter, indicating that people began to view it as normal in a relatively short amount of time.
Wilson, for his part, expected to see greater individual commitment to tackling climate change, if not while Gabrielle was still fresh in our minds.
He also saw a useful window of public support for lawmakers to act.
