Climate change As we hurtle towards 2030, we should be achieving goals limiting our dependence on fossil fuels, but Christopher Luxon’s 100-day plan is all about the economy. Is he not aware that our economy, dependent on weather, is probably more vulnerable than most?
Recalling last year’s pictures of kūmara rotting in the fields, precious soil being washed out to sea, with unwanted slash and a season’s apple crops carried on swollen rivers destroying bridges and roads on the way, clearly indicated that without the land’s products, and its natural beauty attracting tourists, the economy has little else to sustain it.
He promised charging stations throughout the country enabling EVs to confidently travel long distances, but has now removed all incentives to change from fossil fuel, even plans drilling for more of these polluting substances with only a brief nod to developing renewable energy.
Meanwhile major motor companies plan on discontinuing producing petrol-driven vehicles.
Our small country can do little to halt the world’s crazy reliance on polluting substances — but we don’t need to add to it.
Phyl Belsham, Mt Albert
Schooling protesters I applaud the stance David Seymour is taking to mark the students absent after missing a day off school.
As he said, why didn’t they strike on Tuesday when there was no school?
Education is a privilege. Many around the world would give their eye teeth for their children to get the education so readily available for every child in New Zealand.
The fact that it is spurned by some is detrimental to New Zealand now and in the future.
Do these young protesters practise what they preach? Do they decline the offer of a ride in their mum’s SUV and walk or ride their bikes to school?
The saying “put your money where your mouth is” comes to mind.
Anna Murphy, Ōrewa
Top priority The electrified rail link between Auckland and Wellington, much of it through stunning scenery, is about as climate friendly as it gets and yet annually, only a handful of Aucklanders use it.
If we were ever to get serious about climate change, surely such a mode of transport needs to attract business people and commuters, perhaps by providing conference-friendly business cars, video conferencing facilities, conference catering, inter-city and tourist promotion, links to suburbs etc.
Posting a loss of $167 million annually, it should be clear every effort to promote this under-utilised asset should be a top priority.
Gary Hollis, Mellons Bay
Water woes We have been hearing a lot about our creaking, groaning infrastructure recently.
In terms of water infrastructure there has been local government, central government, a transient species once known as Three Waters; and while they argue about everything else, one thing they agree on is that everything to do with water is underfunded.
So, what happens when WaterCare does the numbers and comes up with a pricing level they think will fund present and future needs? The mayor, the minister, every man and his dog jump in to try to stop them.
We need to learn to grow up, take our medicine and just get on with it.
John Christiansen, Mt Albert
Pigging out The front-page story in the Weekend Herald (April 6) refers to the police as “pigs”. The fact that the Hells Angels gang refer to them by that name doesn’t mean we should legitimise it in print.
The headline “Pigs on the Payroll” would be more appropriate on the front page of the Herald’s business section. Here we learn of one CEO’s pay increase of 177 per cent. Another being paid $8.4 million in 2023.
These CEOs have their noses in the company trough like greedy pigs. This in a cost-of-living crisis while many workers struggle to put food on the table for their families.
In my view, nobody deserves to be called a pig.
But if the name is bandied about it should definitely not be used in conjunction with our fine policemen and women who put their lives on the line keeping us all safe.
Glen Stanton, Mairangi Bay
Rubbish idea The progressive removal of rubbish bins from public parks is a potential public health hazard.
Numerous dog owners walk their dogs in popular parks and removing the rubbish bins will discourage owners from picking up dog poo and lead potentially to contamination of soil and water with bacteria and parasites.
The council savings made for not providing rubbish bins in these areas will be negated by the extra work required down the track to remove discarded plastic dog poo bags (and general litter) and to remove the public health hazard.
Enforcement and policing of the $300 fine for not picking up dog poo is unlikely to happen given the council’s already-stretched resources and the large population of dog owners in Auckland.
Alison Feeney, Remuera
Music madness I totally agree with correspondent Glenn Pacey about choice of music while waiting for someone to answer your call (Weekend Herald, April 6)
The same applies to shopping malls with music blasting out from each store.
While in Auckland recently, I went to Albany Mall, with music from a DJ in the centre, then different music in every store.
One store I entered asked if they could help me, my reply was “look at the age of your shoppers — all over 50 and the teenage music playing very loudly”, and I walked out without buying or looking at items in the store.
Wendy Galloway, Ōmokoroa
