When Bay of Islands local Brad Windust heard that Regional Development Minister Shane Jones wants to resurrect a controversial Paihia breakwater project, his response was one of dismay.
“We’ve been here, we said ‘no’ and the politicians need to listen to our community,” Windust said.
For Paihia — which has a permanent population of about 1700 in non-summer times — it would’ve felt like the whole town did say no to the project, with more than 4000 signing a petition in 2021 to stop the Paihia seawalls.
The project includes four separated sea walls around Motumaire Island, the restoration of Horotutu Beach and possible seafloor dredging. It was backed by Jones in 2020 with $8 million from the Government’s Covid-19 Response and Recovery Fund, and $5.8m from Far North District Council.
Locals were concerned the seawalls would be ugly and change the feel of the well-known area, called the Bay of Islands — not the Bay of Breakwaters — for a reason. They also worried the seawalls would create a “rat highway” to Motumaire — a wāhi tapu — change sand drift patterns and trigger erosion in nearby beaches.
Escalating costs forced the council to can the project in 2022, no doubt also persuaded by the public uprising against the proposal. It was not the first time the community had opposed the breakwaters.
Iwi took the matter to the Environment Court, concerned that the breakwaters, originally designed to be connected to Motumaire and Kuia Rongouru islands, could affect marine life and encourage more people to kayak to Motumaire. The plans were altered and consent finally granted in 2010 but the delay was a fatal blow for the project, pushing it into the cold waters of the Global Financial Crisis that saw it put on ice for the first time.
Jones sees the project as essential to help protect Paihia’s wharf, main road and waterfront businesses from wild weather. “It’s an example where the resilience can be improved and we’re going to have to adapt to the fact that volatile weather is impacting the Bay of Islands.”
In some ways, he is right. After a year of unprecedented storms and global temperatures officially breaking all records, climate change is having an impact even NZ First politicians can’t deny.
All places in New Zealand — but especially Northland’s waterfront towns — need to urgently start having some uncomfortable conversations about how the impacts of climate change will be prepared for and mitigated. But Jones needs to remember these must be conversations with the community — residents, iwi, hapū and businesses.
Not only can the community share their on-the-ground knowledge, they are also the ones who will have to decide what sacrifices they are prepared to make to ensure future resilience.
Windust said the Paihia community had never been asked to share its thoughts; the breakwater project had been bulldozed through.
And when projects are bulldozed, people are suspicious of what else will be pushed through.
